blog/2017-0028-cargo-cult-visual-studio.md, before:

extends: post.liquid
title: Cargo cult - the problem with copying existing code
date: 19 Jul 2017 11:52:00 +0100
path: 2017-cargo-cult-visual-studio
tags: cargocult,visualstudio,msbuild
---
A quick note to myself on how to identify build errors. This is also a timely 
reminder that you should create code from scratch once in a while, rather than 
copying an existing project. The pain to get it working will be worthwhile, as 
you will have learnt something new. In my case how to run MSBuild (Microsoft 
build toolchain) and identify what version of SSIS (Microsoft flavoured ETL) my 
project was based on.

I started to wire up my brand new SSIS project to TeamCity (JetBrains flavoured 
CI). Immediately the build failed. Asking the team and no one else had seen the 
error before.

Googling suggested that I try and run MSBuild on TeamCity. One problem, Devs 
don't get direct access to the CI/CD infrastructure. So time to learn how to 
run MSBuild locally.

In the start menu > `All Programs` > `VisualStudio 2015` > `VisualStudio Tools` 
there's a handy shortcut called `MSBuild Command Prompt for VS2015` this will 
setup a command prompt with the correct config to run MSBuild.

After copying over any dependencies for the build task (in my case the SSIS 
DLLs from the TeamCity server), it was just a case of pointing MSBuild to my
build file.

```
C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL>msbuild LOL.build
Microsoft (R) Build Engine version 14.0.25420.1
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Build started 19/07/2017 11:29:31.
Project "C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL\LOL.build" on node 1 (default targets).
SSISBuild:
  **************Building SSIS project: LOL.dtproj **************
  ------
  Loading project file 'LOL.dtproj'

*snipping verbosity*

  C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL\LOL.build(9,3): error : Error while loading 
  package 'WAT.dtsx': The package failed to load due to error 0xC0011008 "Error 
  loading from XML. This occurs when CPackage::LoadFromXML fails.\r

*snipping verbosity*

C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL\LOL.build(9,3): error :    at Microsoft.SqlServer
		.Dts.Runtime.Package.LoadFromXML(String packageXml, IDTSEvents events)\r

    0 Warning(s)
    2 Error(s) <-- not entirely sure why MSBuild felt the need to run twice, 
                   but it did...

Time Elapsed 00:00:01.16
```

This was great, because this was exactly the error I got in TeamCity! Turns out 
our existing SSIS projects target SQL Server 2012. The new project in 
VisualStudio 2015 target SQL Server 2016 by default. So the error is literally
MSBuild saying, "The SSIS DLLs don't know what the hell this file!"

To downgrade the project, it was just the case of right clicking on the SSIS 
project > `Configuration Properties` > `General` > `TargetServerVersion` and 
switching to `SQL Server 2012`.

Then as if by magic...

```
C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL>msbuild LOL.build
Microsoft (R) Build Engine version 14.0.25420.1
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Build started 19/07/2017 11:10:42.
Project "C:\Users\staama1\Source\Workspaces\ESPP\Tasks\SSIS\LOL\Main-Dev
\LOL\LOL.build" on node 1 (default targets).
SSISBuild:
  **************Building SSIS project: LOL.dtproj **************
  ------
  Loading project file 'LOL.dtproj'
  Setting output directory to 'bin\Development'
  Setting project ProtectionLevel to 'DontSaveSensitive'
  Loading ConnectionManager 'ADONET.Chronos.conmgr'
  Loading ConnectionManager 'OLEDB.Chronos.conmgr'
  Loading package 'WAT.dtsx'
  Changing protection level of package to 'DontSaveSensitive'
  Saving project to: 'bin\Development\LOL.ispac'
Done Building Project "C:\Users\staama1\Source\Workspaces\ESPP\Tasks\SSIS\
	OPF_REPSYS\Main-Dev\LOL\LOL.build" (default targets).


Build succeeded.
    0 Warning(s)
    0 Error(s)

Time Elapsed 00:00:01.43
```

## References

- [Cargo cult](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cargo_cult)
- [MSBuild walkthrough](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/visualstudio/msbuild/walkthrough-using-msbuild)

Commit message:

refactor: add an actual reference to cargo cult

blog/2017-0028-cargo-cult-visual-studio.md, after:

extends: post.liquid
title: Cargo cult - the problem with copying existing code
date: 19 Jul 2017 11:52:00 +0100
path: 2017-cargo-cult-visual-studio
tags: cargocult,visualstudio,msbuild
---
A quick note to myself on how to identify build errors. This is also a timely 
reminder that you should create code from scratch once in a while, rather than 
copying an existing project. This is a form of cargo cult (I've linked to the
Wikipedia page in my references below, if you've never heard of the term 
before)

The pain to get it working will be worthwhile, as you will have learnt 
something new. In my case how to run MSBuild (Microsoft build toolchain) and 
identify what version of SSIS (Microsoft flavoured ETL) my project was based 
on.

I started to wire up my brand new SSIS project to TeamCity (JetBrains flavoured 
CI). Immediately the build failed. Asking the team and no one else had seen the 
error before.

Googling suggested that I try and run MSBuild on TeamCity. One problem, Devs 
don't get direct access to the CI/CD infrastructure. So time to learn how to 
run MSBuild locally.

In the start menu > `All Programs` > `VisualStudio 2015` > `VisualStudio Tools` 
there's a handy shortcut called `MSBuild Command Prompt for VS2015` this will 
setup a command prompt with the correct config to run MSBuild.

After copying over any dependencies for the build task (in my case the SSIS 
DLLs from the TeamCity server), it was just a case of pointing MSBuild to my
build file.

```
C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL>msbuild LOL.build
Microsoft (R) Build Engine version 14.0.25420.1
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Build started 19/07/2017 11:29:31.
Project "C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL\LOL.build" on node 1 (default targets).
SSISBuild:
  **************Building SSIS project: LOL.dtproj **************
  ------
  Loading project file 'LOL.dtproj'

*snipping verbosity*

  C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL\LOL.build(9,3): error : Error while loading 
  package 'WAT.dtsx': The package failed to load due to error 0xC0011008 "Error 
  loading from XML. This occurs when CPackage::LoadFromXML fails.\r

*snipping verbosity*

C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL\LOL.build(9,3): error :    at Microsoft.SqlServer
		.Dts.Runtime.Package.LoadFromXML(String packageXml, IDTSEvents events)\r

    0 Warning(s)
    2 Error(s) <-- not entirely sure why MSBuild felt the need to run twice, 
                   but it did...

Time Elapsed 00:00:01.16
```

This was great, because this was exactly the error I got in TeamCity! Turns out 
our existing SSIS projects target SQL Server 2012. The new project in 
VisualStudio 2015 target SQL Server 2016 by default. So the error is literally
MSBuild saying, "The SSIS DLLs don't know what the hell this file!"

To downgrade the project, it was just the case of right clicking on the SSIS 
project > `Configuration Properties` > `General` > `TargetServerVersion` and 
switching to `SQL Server 2012`.

Then as if by magic...

```
C:\Path\To\SSIS\Package\LOL>msbuild LOL.build
Microsoft (R) Build Engine version 14.0.25420.1
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Build started 19/07/2017 11:10:42.
Project "C:\Users\staama1\Source\Workspaces\ESPP\Tasks\SSIS\LOL\Main-Dev
\LOL\LOL.build" on node 1 (default targets).
SSISBuild:
  **************Building SSIS project: LOL.dtproj **************
  ------
  Loading project file 'LOL.dtproj'
  Setting output directory to 'bin\Development'
  Setting project ProtectionLevel to 'DontSaveSensitive'
  Loading ConnectionManager 'ADONET.Chronos.conmgr'
  Loading ConnectionManager 'OLEDB.Chronos.conmgr'
  Loading package 'WAT.dtsx'
  Changing protection level of package to 'DontSaveSensitive'
  Saving project to: 'bin\Development\LOL.ispac'
Done Building Project "C:\Users\staama1\Source\Workspaces\ESPP\Tasks\SSIS\
	OPF_REPSYS\Main-Dev\LOL\LOL.build" (default targets).


Build succeeded.
    0 Warning(s)
    0 Error(s)

Time Elapsed 00:00:01.43
```

## References

- [Cargo cult](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cargo_cult)
- [MSBuild walkthrough](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/visualstudio/msbuild/walkthrough-using-msbuild)
- [Building MSBuild Project From Scratch](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/visualstudio/msbuild/walkthrough-creating-an-msbuild-project-file-from-scratch)
