blog/2019-0011-aws-devops-pro-certification-code-commit.md, before:

---
permalink: "/2019/aws-devops-pro-certification-code-commit"
title: "AWS DevOps Pro Certification Blog Post Series: Code Commit"
categories:
  - "aws,study,certification"
layout: post.liquid
published_date: "2019-03-26 13:37:00 +0000"
is_draft: false
data:
  tags: "aws,study,certification"
  route: blog
---

_This is part of the blog post series: [AWS DevOps Pro Certification](/2019/aws-devops-pro-certification-intro/)_

## Caveat emptor

Using AWS costs money, some of these services may not be part of the AWS [Free Tier](https://aws.amazon.com/free/). You can keep costs down by tearing down anything you've created whilst learning, but it's still possible to run up a hefty bill so pay attention to the instances you setup!

I'm very lucky to be able to use my employer's AWS account. You should ask your place of work if a similar arrangement can be made as part of your study.

## Velocius quam asparagi conquantur

The format of the blog posts is liable to change as I try refine my mental model of each domain, so be sure to revisit the blog posts on a regular basis.

## What?

Code Commit is:
- a managed Version Control service
- Git based
- Files are encrypted at rest, can see KMS keys in...
- Supports AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM). Pro-tip: if you need to brush up on IAM, see Helen Anderson's excellent guide: [Don't you know who IAM?](https://dev.to/helenanders26/aws-series-dont-you-know-who-iam-26b0)

## Why?

Spotted a little gem in the [FAQ](https://aws.amazon.com/codecommit/faqs/) that asks how Code Commit compares against a versioned S3 bucket. Enabling versioning on an S3 bucket means that when you upload a file that already exists, the older version is replaced, but you can still view and download it through the version history (see screenshot).

![](/img/devops-s3-versioning.png)

Whilst this might be okay for reverting back to the previous version of the code, it's handled on a per-file basis. Now imagine trying to track all the files that make up a version of your code?

This is really an argument against version control systems (VCS) and file versioning. VCS was created to simplify change tracking in the source code.

## When?

This is the start of SDLC automation. Everything else hinges on a source code repository. CI can't build and test code until it can pull the code from somewhere.

## How?

This is loosely based around the [Getting Started](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/codecommit/latest/userguide/getting-started.html) section of the User Guide.

The main difference is that I'm going to use the CLI instead of the Web UI to aid in learning these commands too.

Create a repo `aws codecommit create-repository --repository-name hello-codecommit`

```json
{
    "repositoryMetadata": {
        "accountId": "123456",
        "repositoryId": "dc2c437d-e850-4a8b-82e7-7ad85fee99d1",
        "repositoryName": "hello-codecommit",
        "lastModifiedDate": 1553613552.003,
        "creationDate": 1553613552.003,
        "cloneUrlHttp": "https://git-codecommit.xxx.amazonaws.com/v1/repos/hello-codecommit",
        "cloneUrlSsh": "ssh://git-codecommit.xxx.amazonaws.com/v1/repos/hello-codecommit",
        "Arn": "arn:aws:codecommit:xxx:1234567890:hello-codecommit"
    }
}
```

We're going to use SSH to communicate with our new repo, so let's set up a dedicated key (hello-codecommit) and upload the public key to our IAM account.

```bash
ssh-keygen -b 4096 -f hello-codecommit-ssh
# output has been omitted
aws iam upload-ssh-public-key --user booyaa \
  --ssh-public-key-body "$(cat hello-codecommit-ssh.pub)"
```

```json
{
    "SSHPublicKey": {
        "UserName": "booyaa",
        "SSHPublicKeyId": "VALUE_OF_SSHPUBLICKEYID",
        "Fingerprint": "FINGERPRINT",
        "SSHPublicKeyBody": "REDACTED",
        "Status": "Active",
        "UploadDate": "2019-03-26T15:46:14Z"
    }
}
```

Make a note of your `SSHPublicKeyId`, we'll need to add new entry to your ssh config (`~/.ssh/config`):

```
Host git-codecommit.*.amazonaws.com
User VALUE_OF_SSHPUBLICKEYID
IdentityFile /path/to/hello-codecommit-ssh
```

Let's clone our empty repo, you can find the Git URL by looking at the output from running `aws codecommit create-repository`. The key name is `cloneUrlSsh`.

```bash
git clone ssh://git-codecommit.xxx.amazonaws.com/v1/repos/hello-codecommit
Cloning into 'hello-codecommit'...
# omitting boring git stuff
warning: You appear to have cloned an empty repository.
```

Let's go into our new repo, add a file, commit and push it back up.

```bash
cd hello-codecommit
echo "Hello world" > index.html
git add index.html
git commit -m 'initial commit'
git push
```

Next, let's create a feature branch so we can use the pull request feature.

```bash
git checkout -b feature/index-markup
```

replace the contents `index.html` with the following:

```html
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <title>Hello world</title>
</head>
<body>
  Hello world
</body>
</html>
```

```bash
git commit -am '(feat) use markup'
git push -u origin feature/index-markup
aws codecommit create-pull-request \
  --title "Feature: use markup for the index page" \
  --description "What: switch from plain text to markup. Why: markup allows for a richer web experience" \
  --client-request-token booyaa-markup-1234 \
  --targets repositoryName=hello-codecommit,sourceReference=feature/index-markup
```

The `client-request-token` switch is a token we randomly generated, it's used by the API to ensure request cannot be repeated with a changed parameter. If you run that command again, you get the output from the previous transaction instead of a new pull request.

The `targets` switch requires the repository name (hello-codecommit) and the branch you're raising a pull request for (feature/index-markup).


**AWS DevOps Pro Certification Blog Post Series**

- [Intro](/2019/aws-devops-pro-certification-intro/)
- [SLDC automation introduction](/2019/aws-devops-pro-certification-sdlc-intro/)
- Code Commit

Commit message:

(refactor) add link to helen's s3 article

blog/2019-0011-aws-devops-pro-certification-code-commit.md, after:

---
permalink: "/2019/aws-devops-pro-certification-code-commit"
title: "AWS DevOps Pro Certification Blog Post Series: Code Commit"
categories:
  - "aws,study,certification"
layout: post.liquid
published_date: "2019-03-26 13:37:00 +0000"
is_draft: false
data:
  tags: "aws,study,certification"
  route: blog
---

_This is part of the blog post series: [AWS DevOps Pro Certification](/2019/aws-devops-pro-certification-intro/)_

## Caveat emptor

Using AWS costs money, some of these services may not be part of the AWS [Free Tier](https://aws.amazon.com/free/). You can keep costs down by tearing down anything you've created whilst learning, but it's still possible to run up a hefty bill so pay attention to the instances you setup!

I'm very lucky to be able to use my employer's AWS account. You should ask your place of work if a similar arrangement can be made as part of your study.

## Velocius quam asparagi conquantur

The format of the blog posts is liable to change as I try refine my mental model of each domain, so be sure to revisit the blog posts on a regular basis.

## What?

Code Commit is:
- a managed Version Control service
- Git based
- Files are encrypted at rest, can see KMS keys in...
- Supports AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM). Pro-tip: if you need to brush up on IAM, see Helen Anderson's excellent guide: [Don't you know who IAM?](https://dev.to/helenanders26/aws-series-dont-you-know-who-iam-26b0)

## Why?

Spotted a little gem in the [FAQ](https://aws.amazon.com/codecommit/faqs/) that asks how Code Commit compares against a versioned S3 bucket. Enabling versioning on an S3 bucket means that when you upload a file that already exists, the older version is replaced, but you can still view and download it through the version history (see screenshot).

![](/img/devops-s3-versioning.png)

Whilst this might be okay for reverting back to the previous version of the code, it's handled on a per-file basis. Now imagine trying to track all the files that make up a version of your code?

This is really an argument against version control systems (VCS) and file versioning. VCS was created to simplify change tracking in the source code.

Pro-tip: bit rusty on S3? Yup Helen's got you covered again with [What's in the bucket?](https://dev.to/helenanders26/aws-series-whats-in-the-bucket-1k3)

## When?

This is the start of SDLC automation. Everything else hinges on a source code repository. CI can't build and test code until it can pull the code from somewhere.

## How?

This is loosely based around the [Getting Started](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/codecommit/latest/userguide/getting-started.html) section of the User Guide.

The main difference is that I'm going to use the CLI instead of the Web UI to aid in learning these commands too.

Create a repo `aws codecommit create-repository --repository-name hello-codecommit`

```json
{
    "repositoryMetadata": {
        "accountId": "123456",
        "repositoryId": "dc2c437d-e850-4a8b-82e7-7ad85fee99d1",
        "repositoryName": "hello-codecommit",
        "lastModifiedDate": 1553613552.003,
        "creationDate": 1553613552.003,
        "cloneUrlHttp": "https://git-codecommit.xxx.amazonaws.com/v1/repos/hello-codecommit",
        "cloneUrlSsh": "ssh://git-codecommit.xxx.amazonaws.com/v1/repos/hello-codecommit",
        "Arn": "arn:aws:codecommit:xxx:1234567890:hello-codecommit"
    }
}
```

We're going to use SSH to communicate with our new repo, so let's set up a dedicated key (hello-codecommit) and upload the public key to our IAM account.

```bash
ssh-keygen -b 4096 -f hello-codecommit-ssh
# output has been omitted
aws iam upload-ssh-public-key --user booyaa \
  --ssh-public-key-body "$(cat hello-codecommit-ssh.pub)"
```

```json
{
    "SSHPublicKey": {
        "UserName": "booyaa",
        "SSHPublicKeyId": "VALUE_OF_SSHPUBLICKEYID",
        "Fingerprint": "FINGERPRINT",
        "SSHPublicKeyBody": "REDACTED",
        "Status": "Active",
        "UploadDate": "2019-03-26T15:46:14Z"
    }
}
```

Make a note of your `SSHPublicKeyId`, we'll need to add new entry to your ssh config (`~/.ssh/config`):

```
Host git-codecommit.*.amazonaws.com
User VALUE_OF_SSHPUBLICKEYID
IdentityFile /path/to/hello-codecommit-ssh
```

Let's clone our empty repo, you can find the Git URL by looking at the output from running `aws codecommit create-repository`. The key name is `cloneUrlSsh`.

```bash
git clone ssh://git-codecommit.xxx.amazonaws.com/v1/repos/hello-codecommit
Cloning into 'hello-codecommit'...
# omitting boring git stuff
warning: You appear to have cloned an empty repository.
```

Let's go into our new repo, add a file, commit and push it back up.

```bash
cd hello-codecommit
echo "Hello world" > index.html
git add index.html
git commit -m 'initial commit'
git push
```

Next, let's create a feature branch so we can use the pull request feature.

```bash
git checkout -b feature/index-markup
```

replace the contents `index.html` with the following:

```html
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <title>Hello world</title>
</head>
<body>
  Hello world
</body>
</html>
```

```bash
git commit -am '(feat) use markup'
git push -u origin feature/index-markup
aws codecommit create-pull-request \
  --title "Feature: use markup for the index page" \
  --description "What: switch from plain text to markup. Why: markup allows for a richer web experience" \
  --client-request-token booyaa-markup-1234 \
  --targets repositoryName=hello-codecommit,sourceReference=feature/index-markup
```

The `client-request-token` switch is a token we randomly generated, it's used by the API to ensure request cannot be repeated with a changed parameter. If you run that command again, you get the output from the previous transaction instead of a new pull request.

The `targets` switch requires the repository name (hello-codecommit) and the branch you're raising a pull request for (feature/index-markup).


**AWS DevOps Pro Certification Blog Post Series**

- [Intro](/2019/aws-devops-pro-certification-intro/)
- [SLDC automation introduction](/2019/aws-devops-pro-certification-sdlc-intro/)
- Code Commit
